So up to this point, all that we've talked
about is the impact of unnecessary or
necessary included variables on
our regression coefficients.
But there's one other parameter that
we estimate in our regression model,
the residual variance, sigma square.
So what happens if we have,
assuming IID area, errors
then our linear model is additive and
that, that part of the model's correct.
Then we can mathematically describe the
impact of omitting unnecessary variables
or including unnecessary variables.
And it falls along the same lines
as what we discussed before.
If we underfit the model, in other words,
we omit important variables then
the variance estimate is biased.
Why is that?
Because we've attributed to variation
things that are actually systematically
explained by these covariance
that we've omitted.
On the other hand, if we either correctly
fit the model, include all the right
terms, or if we over-fit the model,
then the variance estimate is unbiased.
However, the variance of
the variance estimate,
gets inflated if we include
unnecessary variables.
So it's actually kind of the same rule.
If we omit that as we discussed
before with coefficiency.
If we omit variables, then we get bias.
If we include variables,
then we get a less reliable estimate.
So it's roughly the same impact going on.
So let's talk about model
selection in general.
Automated model selection, and I just want
to briefly mention again that automated
model selection is something that we
cover in the machine learning class.
We really I think at one point
it was a statistical topic but
it's really moved into the realm of
machine learning for the most part.
I would say though, even for relatively
simple linear regression models,
the space of model terms that you
have to search among explodes really
quickly when you start
including interactions and
polynomial terms like the square
of a regressor and so on.
If you have a lot of regressors and you're
interested in how do I reduce this space?
Then there's a lot of factor analytic and
things like principal components.
Those kinds of techniques
that are available to you
to reduce your covariate
space down to size.
Now however, those come with consequences.
Your principal components or factors that
you obtained might be less interpretable
than the original data that
you're interested in again.
Again, this is probably better
served in a multivariable class,
a multivariate class, or
a class on machine learning.
But for us we're going to mostly consider
the case where we have a relatively
small number of aggressors and we're
going to pick through them with a highly
interactive process between the analyst,
the data, and the scientific context.
Another thing I would mention is that good
design can often eliminate the need for
a lot of this model discussion.
We've talked a lot about how
randomization can really prevent a lot of
the problems that we're
talking about with making our
variable of interest unrelated to nuisance
variables that we're not interested in or
nuisance variables that
we don't even know about.
However, there's other aspects of
design that can serve the same purpose.
For example if we stratify and
randomized within strata.
The classic example of this when
this was developed was R.A.
Fisher was working in field crop
experiments and they needed.
Let's say you're trying
a different kind of seed,
you might block on different areas of
the field that you were going to plant in,
and randomize the different
seeds to those areas.
So you might have two different kinds of
seeds, but they will have been distributed
in a systematic way that is
fair across the field, but
also that within that design there
will also be some randomization.
This topic of experimental
design is a pretty broad topic.
Another great example is,
in biostatistics,
the field I work in most, a very common
kind of design is a crossover design.
And in that case, you try to use
every subject as their own control.
So let's say for
example you're interested in looking
at two different kinds of aspirin.
And you might give the aspirin
to one group of people and
then the other aspirin to
another group of people.
Let's say they have different gels or
whatever that determine how it
gets absorbed in your stomach.
So if those two groups aren't the same,
either the randomization wasn't
very good and there was some sort of
imbalance that you just got unlucky about,
or if the study was just observational,
then the comparison of those two groups
might be biased by whatever differentiates
the groups rather than group one
receiving one kind of aspirin and group
two receiving a different kind of aspirin.
On the other hand if you can give
a person one kind of aspirin and
later on give them a different kind of
aspirin when they have another headache
that would compare each
person to themselves right?
Control block on the person so to speak.
So that's a design strategy.
Now, there's some nuance with
this design strategy as well.
What happens if there's some residual
effect of the first aspirin when you give
the second one, right?
So maybe you could handle that
with some sort of wash-out period,
a long wash-out period,
something like that.
But at any rate,
the point of that design is to make it so
that you're comparing people
with themselves to control and
everything that's intrinsic to
the person at least across time periods.
A control for that by giving
both aspirins to each person.
Maybe you would randomize the order
in which they received them.
That's called a crossover design.
At any rate, the broader point that I'm
trying to make Is it's often the case that
good, thoughtful, experimental design
can really eliminate the need for
some of the main considerations that you'd
have to go through in model building.
If you were to just collect data
in an observational fashion.
The last thing I'd say is there's
one automated model search
technique that I like quite a bit,
and I find it very useful.
And it's the idea of
looking at nested models.
So I'm often interested
in a particular variable.
And I'm very interested in how the other
variables that I've
collected will impact it.
So I'm interested in a treatment,
or something like that,
some important variable, but I'm worried
that my treatment groups are imbalanced or
That it, with respect to potentially
some of these other variables.
So, I might look, what I'd like to look
at is, the model that just includes
the treatment by itself than the model
that includes the treatment and
let's say age, if the ages weren't really
balanced between the two treatment groups.
And then one that looks at age and gender,
if maybe the genders between the groups
weren't really balanced, and then so on.
And this idea,
creating models that are nested,
every successive model contains all
the terms of the previous model,
leads to a very easy way of
testing each successive model.
And these nested model examples
are very easy to do, so
I'm just going to show
you some code right here.
On how you do nested model testing in R.
So, I've hit, I fit three linear
models to our Swiss dataset.
The first one just includes agriculture.
Let's pretend that that's the variable
that we're interested in, okay?
And then the next one includes
agriculture and examination in education.
I've put both of those in because.
I'm thinking they're kind of
measuring the same thing.
But now, after this lecture,
I'm concerned over the possibility that
they're too much so
measuring the same thing.
But let's put that aside for
this time being.
And then the third model
includes examination,
education, plus catholic
plus infant mortality.
So all the terms.
So now I have three nested models and
I'm interested in seeing what
happens to my effect as I go
through those three models.
The point being in this case you can
test whether or not the inclusion
of the additional set of extra terms
is necessary with the Nova functions.
So I do a Nova fit 1.
Fit three and fit five.
Okay, that's what I named them.
One, three, five.
And, then you see down here what
you get is a listing of the models.
Model one, model two, model three.
And then it gives you
the degrees of freedom.
That's the number of data points minus the
number of parameters that it had to fit.
The residual sums of squares and
then the excess degrees of freedom of
going Df is the excess degrees of freedom
going from model one to model two,
and then model two to model three.
So, we added two parameters in
going from model one to model two.
That's why that Df is two.
And, then we added two additional
parameters going from model two to
model three.
So the 2 parameters we added from
going from model one to model two
is we added examination and education
their two regression coefficients.
Going from model two to model
three we added catholic and
infant mortality there too
were crashing coefficients.
Okay so with this residual sums
of squares and the degrees of
freedom you can calculate so called
F statistic, and thus get a P value.
This gives you the F statistic and
the P value associated with each of them.
And then here it shows that yes,
the inclusion of education
examination appears to be necessary over
just looking at agriculture by itself.
Then when I look at the next one,
it says yes.
The inclusion of Catholic and
infant mortality appears to be necessary
beyond just including examination,
education, and agriculture.
So if the way in which you're
interested in looking at your
data naturally falls into a nested
model search, as it often does I think,
when you're interested in one variable in
specific, as in this case I think this
would be a pretty natural way of
thinking about the series of analyses.
Then some kind of nested model
search is a reasonable thing to do.
It doesn't work if the models that
you're looking at aren't nested.
For example, if I had the first model or
model two had examination but
not education.
And the third model had education,
but not examination.
This wouldn't apply.
You'd have to do something else.
And there I think you get into
the harder world of automated
model selection with things
like information criteria.
So, I would put all that stuff
off to our prediction class and
then just leave you this one technique
that's useful in the one Specific instance
where you've decided to kind of
look along a series of models
each getting increasingly more complicated
but including the previous one.
Okay so I hope in this lecture
that you've gotten a couple of
model selection techniques
that you can use.
I hope you've also learned that there are
some basic consequences that occur if you
include variables that you shouldn't have
or exclude variables that you should have.
These has consequences to your
coefficients that you're interested in,
they have consequences to your
residual variance estimate.
We didn't even touch on some other
aspects of poor model fit that can occur
such as absence of linearity and other
things like that, non-normality and so on.
So again, it's generally necessary to take
your model fits with a grain of salt,
because more than likely,
one aspect of your model is wrong.
And I'll leave you then with
this famous quote by George Box,
who very famously said, all models
are wrong, some models are useful.
And I think that's a very good credo
to go along with, that yes, for
sure your model is wrong but it might
be useful in the sense of being a lens
to teach you something useful and
true about your data set.
Ok so that ends today's lecture and I look
forward to seeing you for the next one.